Add initial Java documentation (#304)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/java/manual_instrumentation.md

---

> title: "Manual Instrumentation"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Title: "Manual Instrumentation"
```

> weight: 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Weight: 3
```

---

## Traces

### Instantiate `TracerProvider`

In the [OpenTelemetry Tracing
API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md),
the `TracerProvider` is the entry point and is expected to be the stateful
object that holds any configuration. The `TracerProvider` also provides access

> to the [`Tracer`](#instantiate-a-tracer).

Author: ```suggestion
to the [`Tracer`](#instantiate-tracer).
```

```java
TracerSdkManagement tracerProvider =
    OpenTelemetrySdk.getGlobalTracerManagement();
```

### Instantiate `Tracer`

> In order to instrument, a `Tracer` must be acquired, which is responsible for
> creating spans and interacting with the [`Context`](#context-propagation). A
> `Tracer` is acquired by using the [OpenTelemetry Tracing
> API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md)
> specifying the name and version of the [library
> instrumenting](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/glossary.md#instrumentation-library)
> the [instrumented
> library](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/glossary.md#instrumented-library)
> or application to be monitored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to instrument, you must acquire a `Tracer`. A `Tracer` is responsible for
creating spans and interacting with the [`Context`](#context-propagation). To acquire a
`Tracer` use the [OpenTelemetry Tracing
API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/api.md)
and specify the name and version of the [library
instrumenting](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/glossary.md#instrumentation-library)
the [instrumented
library](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/glossary.md#instrumented-library)
or application to be monitored.
```

```java
Tracer tracer =
    OpenTelemetry.getTracer("instrumentation-library-name","semver:1.0.0");
```

### Create Spans

#### Basic

To create a basic span, you only need to specify the name of the span. The
start and end time of the span is automatically set by the OpenTelemetry SDK.

```java
Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("my span").startSpan();
try (Scope scope = TracingContextUtils.currentContextWith(span)) {
	// your use case
	...
} catch (Throwable t) {
    span.setStatus(StatusCanonicalCode.ERROR, "Change it to your error message");
} finally {
    span.end(); // closing the scope does not end the span, this has to be done manually
}
```

#### Nested

Most of the time, we want to correlate spans for nested operations.
OpenTelemetry supports tracing within processes and across remote processes.

> For more details how to share context between remote processes, see [Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about how to share context between remote processes, see [Context
```

Propagation](#context-propagation).

For a method `a` calling a method `b`, the spans could be manually linked in the
following way:

```java
void a() {
  Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("a")
        .startSpan();
  b(parentSpan);
  parentSpan.end();
}
void b(Span parentSpan) {
  Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("b")
        .setParent(parentSpan)
        .startSpan();
  // do stuff
  childSpan.end();
}
```

> The OpenTelemetry API offers also an automated way to propagate the parentSpan:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry API also offers an automated way to propagate the parentSpan:
```

```java
void a() {
  Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("a").startSpan();
  try(Scope scope = TracingContextUtils.currentContextWith(parentSpan)) {
    b();
  } finally {
    parentSpan.end();
  }
}
void b() {
  Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("b")
    // NOTE: setParent(parentSpan) is not required; 
    // `TracingContextUtils.getCurrentSpan()` is automatically added as parent
    .startSpan();
  try(Scope scope = TracingContextUtils.currentContextWith(childSpan)) {
    // do stuff
  } finally {
    childSpan.end();
  }
}
```

To link spans from remote processes, it is sufficient to set the [Remote
Context](#context-propagation) as parent.

```java
Span childRemoteParent = tracer.spanBuilder("Child").setParent(remoteContext).startSpan();
```

### Enrich Spans

#### Attributes

> In OpenTelemetry spans can be created freely and it's up to the implementor to
> annotate them with attributes specific to the represented operation. Attributes
> provide additional context on a span about the specific operation it tracks,
> such as results or operation properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OpenTelemetry, you can create spans freely. It's up to the implementor to
annotate spans with attributes specific to the represented operation. Attributes
provide additional context on a span about the specific operation it tracks,
such as results or operation properties.
```

```java
Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("/resource/path").setSpanKind(Span.Kind.CLIENT).startSpan();
span.setAttribute("http.method", "GET");
span.setAttribute("http.url", url.toString());
```

Some of these operations represent calls that use well-known protocols like

> HTTP or database calls. For these, OpenTelemetry requires specific attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP or database calls. For these operations, OpenTelemetry requires specific attributes
```

to be set. The full attribute list is available in the Semantic Conventions in
the cross-language specification.

#### Events

Spans can be annotated with named events that can carry zero or more [Span

> Attributes](#span-attributes), each of which is itself a name/value map paired

Author: ```suggestion
Attributes](#attributes), each of which is itself a name/value map paired
```

automatically with a timestamp.

```java
span.addEvent("Init");
...
span.addEvent("End");
```

```java
Attributes eventAttributes = Attributes.of(
    AttributeKey.stringKey("key"), "value",
    AttributeKey.longKey("result"), 0L);

span.addEvent("End Computation", eventAttributes);
```

#### Links

> A Span may be linked to zero or more other Spans that are causally related.
> Links can be used to represent batched operations where a Span was initiated by
> multiple initiating Spans, each representing a single incoming item being
> processed in the batch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can link a span to zero or more other spans that are causally related.
Use links to represent batched operations where a span was initiated by
multiple initiating spans, each representing a single incoming item being
processed in the batch.
```

```java
Span child = tracer.spanBuilder("childWithLink")
        .addLink(parentSpan1.getContext())
        .addLink(parentSpan2.getContext())
        .addLink(parentSpan3.getContext())
        .addLink(remoteContext)
    .startSpan();
```

> For more details how to read context from remote processes, see [Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about how to read context from remote processes, see [Context
```

Propagation](#context-propagation).

### Context Propagation

OpenTelemetry provides a text-based approach to propagate context to remote
services. By default, the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/)
format is used.

> The following presents an example of an outgoing HTTP request using
> `HttpURLConnection`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows an outgoing HTTP request using
`HttpURLConnection`:
```

```java
// Tell OpenTelemetry to inject the context in the HTTP headers
TextMapPropagator.Setter<HttpURLConnection> setter =
  new TextMapPropagator.Setter<HttpURLConnection>() {
    @Override
    public void put(HttpURLConnection carrier, String key, String value) {
        // Insert the context as Header
        carrier.setRequestProperty(key, value);
    }
};

URL url = new URL("http://127.0.0.1:8080/resource");
Span outGoing = tracer.spanBuilder("/resource").setSpanKind(Span.Kind.CLIENT).startSpan();
try (Scope scope = TracingContextUtils.currentContextWith(outGoing)) {
  // Semantic Convention.
  // (Observe that to set these, Span does not *need* to be the current instance.)
  outGoing.setAttribute("http.method", "GET");
  outGoing.setAttribute("http.url", url.toString());
  HttpURLConnection transportLayer = (HttpURLConnection) url.openConnection();
  // Inject the request with the *current*  Context, which contains our current Span.
  OpenTelemetry.getPropagators().getTextMapPropagator().inject(Context.current(), transportLayer, setter);
  // Make outgoing call
} finally {
  outGoing.end();
}
...
```

> Similarly, the text-based approach can be used to read the W3C Trace Context
> from incoming requests. The following presents an example of processing an
> incoming HTTP request using
> [HttpExchange](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/jre/api/net/httpserver/spec/com/sun/net/httpserver/HttpExchange.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, you can use the text-based approach to read the W3C Trace Context
from incoming requests. The following example demonstrates processing an
incoming HTTP request using
[HttpExchange](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/jre/api/net/httpserver/spec/com/sun/net/httpserver/HttpExchange.html):
```

  // Extract the SpanContext and other elements from the request.
  Context extractedContext = OpenTelemetry.getPropagators().getTextMapPropagator()
        .extract(Context.current(), httpExchange, getter);
  Span serverSpan = null;
  try (Scope scope = ContextUtils.withScopedContext(extractedContext)) {
    // Automatically use the extracted SpanContext as parent.
    serverSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("/resource").setSpanKind(Span.Kind.SERVER)
        .startSpan();
    // Add the attributes defined in the Semantic Conventions
    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.method", "GET");
    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.scheme", "http");
    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.host", "localhost:8080");
    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.target", "/resource");
    // Serve the request
    ...
  } finally {
    if (serverSpan != null) {
      serverSpan.end();
    }
  }
}
```

Other propagators are available as extensions, most notably
[Zipkin
B3](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/master/extensions/trace-propagators/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/extension/trace/propagation).

### Processors

The following processors are available today:

#### SimpleSpanProcessor

> This span processor exports span immediately after they are ended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This span processor exports spans immediately after they end.
```

Example:

```java
SimpleSpanProcessor simpleSpansProcessor = SimpleSpanProcessor.builder(exporter).build();
tracerProvider.addSpanProcessor(simpleSpansProcessor);
```

#### BatchSpanProcessor

This span processor exports spans in batches.

Example:

```java
BatchSpanProcessor batchSpansProcessor =
    BatchSpanProcessor.builder(exporter).build();
tracerProvider.addSpanProcessor(batchSpansProcessor);
```

> A varitey of configuration parameters can also be specified:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also specify a variety of configuration parameters:
```

```java
BatchSpanProcessor batchSpansProcessor =
    BatchSpanProcessor.builder(exporter)
        .setExportOnlySampled(true) // send only sampled spans to the exporter
        .setMaxExportBatchSize(512) // maximum batch size to use
        .setMaxQueueSize(2048) // queue size; mmust be >= the export batch size
        .setExporterTimeoutMillis(
            30_000) // max amount of time an export can run before getting interrupted
        .setScheduleDelayMillis(5000) // set time between two different exports
        .build();
tracerProvider.addSpanProcessor(batchSpansProcessor);
```

#### MultiSpanProcessor

> A MultiSpanProcessor accepts a list of Span Processors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A MultiSpanProcessor accepts a list of span processors.
```

Example:

```java
SpanProcessor multiSpanProcessor =
    MultiSpanProcessor.create(Arrays.asList(simpleSpansProcessor, batchSpansProcessor));
tracerProvider.addSpanProcessor(multiSpanProcessor);
```

### Exporters

*TODO*

### Sampling

*TODO*

## Metrics

> OpenTelemetry provides support for metrics, a time series of numbers that might
> express things such as CPU utilization, request count for an HTTP server or a
> business metric such as transactions.
> 
> All metrics can be annotated with labels: additional qualifiers that help
> describe what subdivision of the measurements the metric represents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry provides support for metrics, a time series of numbers that might
express things such as CPU utilization, request count for an HTTP server, or a
business metric such as transactions.

All metrics can be annotated with labels. Labels are additional qualifiers that help
describe what subdivision of the measurements the metric represents.
```
